[Alerting V2][Serverless & 9.5][M2] Add experimental alerting features overview pages (#6521)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/alerting/kibana-alerting-experimental.md

You can build and test detection logic before wiring up any notifications, and update notification routing across all rules in one place without editing the rules themselves.

## The four building blocks

The {{alerting-v2-system}} is built around four objects: rules, alert episodes, action policies, and workflows, each with a distinct role.

### Rules

A rule defines what to watch for in your data and how often to check. Every rule runs in one of two modes: alert or signal.

- **Alert**: Opens an alert episode when the rule finds a match, keeps it open until the condition clears, and can notify your team or trigger automated actions when the state changes. Use this when you want the system to track an issue and tell someone about it.
- **Signal**: Records each match as a data point with no ongoing tracking and no notifications. Use this when you want to capture activity for later querying and investigation.

<!-- TODO: When PR #6523 (rules) merges, uncomment the link below and trim this sub-section to 1–2 anchor sentences + the link.
Refer to [Rules](kibana-alerting-experimental/rules.md) to learn more.
-->

### Alert episodes

> In Alert mode, the rule opens one alert episode per problem and keeps it open until the condition clears. The alert episode moves through states (pending, active, recovering, inactive) giving you one lifecycle to triage rather than a separate item per rule check. You manage alert episodes on the **Alerts** page.

Author: UI detail that's not critical to include in the exposition docs.

```suggestion
In Alert mode, the rule opens one alert episode per problem and keeps it open until the condition clears. The alert episode moves through states (pending, active, recovering, inactive) giving you one lifecycle to triage rather than a separate item per rule check.
```

<!-- TODO: When PR #6527 (alerts) merges, uncomment the link below and trim this sub-section to 1–2 anchor sentences + the link.
Refer to [Alert episodes](kibana-alerting-experimental/alerts.md) to learn more.
-->

### Action policies

An action policy is the gating layer between an alert episode and a workflow. It decides whether and when to invoke a workflow by evaluating suppression, match conditions, and frequency. Policy configuration determines the scope. A policy can apply to alert episodes from a specific rule, multiple rules, or all rules in the space.

<!-- TODO: When PR #6525 (workflows/notifications) merges, uncomment the link below and trim this sub-section to 1–2 anchor sentences + the link.
Refer to [Notifications and actions](kibana-alerting-experimental/notifications-actions.md) to learn more.
-->

### Workflows

> A workflow is what actually sends the message or runs the automation, for example, posting to Slack, sending an email, calling a webhook. The {{alerting-v2-system}} invokes workflows either through action policies (on a schedule, with conditions) or in direct response to a state change on an alert episode.

Reviewer: I don't think it's an "or" as far as "either through action policies OR in direct response to a state change". Could we say

> invokes workflows via action policies which can be configured on a schedule or on state change.

?

Author: ```suggestion
A workflow is what actually sends the message or runs the automation, for example, posting to Slack, sending an email, calling a webhook. The {{alerting-v2-system}} invokes workflows through action policies that you configure to trigger on a schedule or on a state change on an alert episode.
```

<!-- TODO: When PR #6525 (workflows/notifications) merges, uncomment the link below and trim this sub-section to 1–2 anchor sentences + the link.
Refer to [Connect workflows](kibana-alerting-experimental/workflows-alerting.md) to learn more.
-->

## How the pieces fit together [how-pieces-fit-together]

What happens after a rule finds something depends entirely on the rule's mode.

### Alert mode

> Use Alert mode when you want to track issues and be notified. An alert episode groups the rule events produced by a rule and its lifecycle state evolves as new rule events are written: it opens when the first matching event arrives and advances through states until the condition clears.

Reviewer: The various values for alert state are confusing so maybe we can be careful about adding confusion, since "opens" suggests an "open" state we don't (currently) have. It's tricky because we can't say "it becomes active" either because it might start on "pending". 

Could we say "...and its lifecycle state evolves as new rule events are written: this lifecycle begins when..." ?

Author: Oh yeah, good point. Definitely don't want to imply that `open` is a valid lifecycle state for alert episodes. Here's a version that doesn't reference lifecycle states:

```suggestion
Use Alert mode when you want to track issues and be notified. An alert episode groups the rule events produced by a rule. Each episode has a lifecycle that starts with the first matching rule event and advances through states as new events are written.
```

```
Rule runs → conditions met → writes rule event to .rule-events
  → alert episode groups rule events (pending → active)
      → [dispatcher] → action policy → workflow → notification
  → condition clears → new rule event written (recovering → inactive)
      → [dispatcher] → action policy → workflow → notification
```

> The rule evaluates {{esql}} on a schedule and writes each result as a rule event to `.rule-events`. These events are grouped into an alert episode, and each new event can advance the episode's lifecycle state. When a match occurs, the episode becomes active and the dispatcher evaluates all enabled action policies against it, invoking any workflows that pass suppression, match conditions, and frequency gates. When the condition clears, a new rule event moves the episode to recovering and recovery notifications fire through the same pipeline.

Reviewer: Maybe some potential confusion here, let me see what you think of a few small tweaks here:

> The rule evaluates {{esql}} on a schedule and writes each result to the `.rule-events` index. At query time, these events can be grouped into an alert episode. Each new event that is appended to the episode may advance the episode's lifecycle state. Action policies allow users to specify exactly which episodes should trigger workflows, how often, and whether those matching episodes should be dispatched as a group or as individual workflows. When the condition clears, the episode will become inactive, which is another state that the action policy can match on, enabling recovery notifications through the same pipeline.

Feel free to rewrite this, and ping me if you want to know _why_ I made any specific change in this suggestion. :)

Author: Looks good, though I'll likely make some minor adjustments where there's passive voice. I do have one follow-up question: my understanding was that alert episodes must recover (i.e., go through the `recover` state) before becoming `inactive`. Is that not always the case? Are there times when episodes can skip lifecycle states?

Reviewer: Hm, did something I wrote here imply they can skip? Or just an unrelated question?

I'm not 100% sure, but I do think @doakalexi had just told me that an alert can go from pending -> inactive if the condition clears before it goes active, so I think they CAN skip. But I'm not sure how many skip paths are valid. cc: @mikecote @darnautov

Author: Prob better to keep it simple for now and just stick with the use case of an alert episode moving from recovered to inactive. I ended up breaking this para into numbered steps that make the workflow easier to understand for humans and agents parsing this page. [Here's](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521/explore-analyze/alerting/kibana-alerting-experimental/how-it-works#how-it-works-alert-mode) what it currently looks like.

:::{image} ../images/rule-alert-mode-diagram.png
:alt: Diagram of Alert mode flow. 
:::
-->
::::

### Signal mode

Use Signal mode when you want to record matches for querying and analysis without alerting anyone. The rule writes a signal and stops — no alert episode is opened and no notifications are sent.

```
Rule runs → the rule's conditions are met → writes a signal
  → queryable in Discover
  → no alert episode, no action policy, no notification
```

The rule evaluates {{esql}} on a schedule and writes a rule event (signal) to `.rule-events`. The signal is immediately available for querying in Discover, dashboards, and {{esql}}.

::::{dropdown} Example: Rule runs in Signal mode
A security team wants to track calls to a rarely-used admin API endpoint, but individual calls aren't suspicious enough to page anyone. To start collecting data without generating noise, the team creates a Signal mode rule:

1. The rule runs an {{esql}} query on a schedule, checking for calls to the admin API endpoint.
2. Each time the condition is met, the rule writes a signal to `.rule-events`.
3. The signals accumulate silently and are immediately queryable in Discover.

> After running the Signal mode rule for a few weeks, the team has enough data to understand normal call patterns and identify what volume looks anomalous. With that baseline established, the team is ready to create an Alert mode rule that opens an alert episode and notifies the on-call team when the call rate crosses a meaningful threshold.

Reviewer: It would be nice to mention different benefits than collecting data, I think you could probably do what this paragraph describes somewhat easily with a single query to the source data. Could we orient this paragraph around

1. User can create an alert mode rule that references the existence of these admin API calls in addition to a spike in error rates in any service, in order to make a "rule on alerts".

2. User can explore this signal data as evidence while investigating an outage that may or may not be related to this admin endpoint. These data allow the user to explore patterns over time without having to reconstruct the source query and without having to worry about whether the source data was cleared due to retention limits. 

I don't know how to make it succinct, maybe just the first one is good enough here, but these are the two primary purposes of signal mode rules, that I think people will most respond to, as far as I understand so far.

Author: Addressed in [`e892efc` (this PR)](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521/commits/e892efce9530ba5c5101adb4b8cfd66cd78c501c).

---
applies_to:
  stack: preview 
  serverless: preview
products:
  - id: kibana
  - id: cloud-serverless
description: "How the {{alerting-v2-system}} watches your data, turns conditions into signals and alert episodes, routes alert episodes through action policies and workflows, and where to go next in the docs."
---

# {{alerting-v2-system-cap}} overview [alerting-overview]

The {{alerting-v2-system}} in {{kib}} is marked **Experimental** in the UI and is subject to change before general availability. It includes rules, alert episodes, action policies, workflows, and connectors. For the existing {{kib}} alerting system, refer to [{{kib}} alerting](alerts.md).

The {{alerting-v2-system}} watches your {{es}} data continuously, so your team doesn't have to. You define the conditions that matter, such as when to open an issue, who should know, and how often to notify them. The system handles the rest.

## The core idea [kibana-alerting-v2-overview]

> The {{alerting-v2-system}} separates *detecting* a problem from *acting* on it. A rule watches your data and records what it finds. Action policies decide which workflows to invoke, who to notify, and when. In most alerting systems, notification settings are wired directly onto each rule, which means changing who gets notified requires editing every rule. This design lets you build and test detection logic before wiring up any notifications, and update notification routing without touching your rules.

Reviewer 2: Either I just don't get it or it's super confusing 😄  You say "in most alerting system...", so is this experimental system working differently? If so, how? Do I understand correctly that in the experimental system you DON'T have to edit every rule, which means you can change the notification without editing the rules? If this is a big benefit, maybe it's worth stating directly/more clearly, e.g. something like "You can update notification routing across all rules in one place, without editing individual rules." (if it works the way I understand it does).

Author: > Do I understand correctly that in the experimental system you DON'T have to edit every rule, which means you can change the notification without editing the rules? 

Yes, this is correct and good feedback! 

I removed "in most alerting system..." since it's really only useful for users who are moving from kibana alerting to this new experimental alerting system. Also moved the main benefit of the new system toward the front, so it's not buried in the description.

## The four building blocks

The {{alerting-v2-system}} is built around four objects: rules, alert episodes, action policies, and workflows, each with a distinct role.

### Rules

> A rule defines what to watch for in your data and how often to check. Every rule runs in one of two modes:

Author: This might need to be updated. See https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/issues/6837 for more info.

Author: Updated in [`bc0baa3` (this PR)](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521/commits/bc0baa30469323bf3581e791fb398d218d9d3cda)

<!-- TODO: Uncomment when PR #6525 (workflows/notifications) is merged:
Refer to [Notifications and actions](kibana-alerting-experimental/notifications-actions.md) to learn more.
-->

### Workflows
A workflow is what actually sends the message or runs the automation, for example, posting to Slack or sending an email. Action policies hand off to workflows for delivery. Without a workflow attached, no notification is sent.
<!-- TODO: Uncomment when PR #6525 (workflows/notifications) is merged:
Refer to [Workflows for the {{alerting-v2-system}}](kibana-alerting-experimental/workflows-alerting.md) to learn more.
-->

## How the pieces fit together [how-pieces-fit-together]

What happens after a rule finds something depends entirely on the rule's mode.

### Alert mode

Use Alert mode when you want to track issues and be notified. The rule opens an alert episode when the condition is met and keeps it open until the condition clears.

```

> Rule runs → finds something → writes a rule event

Reviewer 2: Would the something be a breach or are there other possibilities? If not, maybe say it directly: "finds a breach". Or a problem? IDK, "something" just sounds super vague.

Author: Fair point! I changed this to "rule's conditions are met"

#### Example: Rule runs in Alert mode

An SRE team creates a rule in Alert mode that checks checkout service latency every five minutes. When p95 exceeds 2 seconds for more than one consecutive check, the rule opens an alert episode. An action policy with a `rule.tags: "checkout"` matcher picks it up, skips low-severity alert episodes, and sends a Slack message through an on-call workflow.

The on-call engineer gets one message, investigates, fixes a slow query, and latency drops. The alert episode recovers automatically. No dashboard watching required.

:::{image} ../images/rule-alert-mode-diagram.png
:alt: Diagram of Alert mode flow. A rule runs ES|QL on a schedule. When it finds a match, it writes a rule event tied to an ongoing alert episode. The alert episode moves through pending, active, recovering, and inactive states. An action policy matches eligible alert episodes and routes them to a workflow, which delivers a notification.
:::

### Detect mode

Use Detect mode when you want to record matches for querying and analysis without alerting anyone. The rule writes a signal and stops. An alert episode is not opened, and notifications are not sent.

```

> Rule runs → finds something → writes a signal

Reviewer 2: Same here regarding "something" 🙂

Author: Same change

---
applies_to:
  stack: experimental 9.5+
  serverless: experimental
products:
  - id: kibana
  - id: cloud-serverless
description: The experimental Kibana alerting system uses ES|QL rules to detect conditions, track problems as alert episodes, and route notifications through reusable action policies.
---

# {{alerting-v2-system-cap}} overview [alerting-overview]

The {{alerting-v2-system}} in {{kib}} is marked **Experimental** in the UI and is subject to change before general availability. It includes rules, alert episodes, action policies, workflows, and connectors. For the existing {{kib}} alerting system, refer to [{{kib}} alerting](alerts.md).

The {{alerting-v2-system}} watches your {{es}} data continuously, so your team doesn't have to. You define the conditions that matter, such as when to open an issue, who should know, and how often to notify them. The system handles the rest.

## The core idea [kibana-alerting-v2-overview]

> The {{alerting-v2-system}} separates *detecting* a problem from *acting* on it. Rules focus purely on what to watch for in your data. Action policies handle who gets notified, when, and how, independently of any rule. You can build and test detection logic before wiring up any notifications, and update notification routing across all rules in one place without editing the rules themselves.

Reviewer 3: Rules focus purely on what to watch for in your data and to collect breach/recovery events.

Author: Fixed in [`aeb19c8` (this PR)](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521/commits/aeb19c8e4d603ab69ca81cce21e9d86f5b6c3833).

A rule defines what to watch for in your data and how often to check. Every rule runs in one of two modes: alert or signal.

- **Alert**: Opens an alert episode when the rule finds a match, keeps it open until the condition clears, and can notify your team or trigger automated actions when the state changes. Use this when you want the system to track an issue and tell someone about it.
- **Signal**: Records each match as a data point with no ongoing tracking and no notifications. Use this when you want to capture activity for later querying and investigation.

<!-- TODO: Uncomment when PR #6523 (rules) is merged:
Refer to [Rules](kibana-alerting-experimental/rules.md) to learn more.
-->

### Alert episodes
In Alert mode, the rule opens one alert episode per problem and keeps it open until the condition clears. The alert episode moves through states (pending, active, recovering, inactive) giving you one lifecycle to triage rather than a separate item per rule check. You manage alert episodes on the **Alerts** page.
<!-- TODO: Uncomment when PR #6524 (alerts) is merged:
Refer to [Alert episodes](kibana-alerting-experimental/alerts.md) to learn more.
-->

### Action policies

> An action policy is the gating layer between an alert episode and a workflow. It decides whether and when to invoke a workflow by evaluating suppression, match conditions, and frequency. You can set conditions to filter which alert episodes it applies to, for example, only critical severity alert episodes from a specific service. Global action policies apply to alert episodes from any rule in the space. Per-rule action policies scope to a single rule for more targeted routing.

Reviewer 3: there's no longer a distinction between global action policies and per-rule action policies. they are now merged and the policy configuration determines if they apply to a rule/ multiple rules or globally

Author: Fixed in [`aeb19c8` (this PR)](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521/commits/aeb19c8e4d603ab69ca81cce21e9d86f5b6c3833).

-->

### Workflows
A workflow is what actually sends the message or runs the automation, for example, posting to Slack or sending an email. Action policies hand off to workflows for delivery. Without a workflow attached, no notification is sent.
<!-- TODO: Uncomment when PR #6525 (workflows/notifications) is merged:
Refer to [Workflows for the {{alerting-v2-system}}](kibana-alerting-experimental/workflows-alerting.md) to learn more.
-->

## How the pieces fit together [how-pieces-fit-together]

What happens after a rule finds something depends entirely on the rule's mode.

### Alert mode

Use Alert mode when you want to track issues and be notified. The rule opens an alert episode when the condition is met and keeps it open until the condition clears.

```
Rule runs → the rule's conditions are met → writes a rule event
  → alert episode (pending → active)
      → [dispatcher] → action policy → workflow → notification
  → condition clears (recovering → inactive)
      → [dispatcher] → action policy → workflow → notification
```

1. The rule evaluates {{esql}} on a schedule and writes a rule event to `.rule-events`.

> 2. The rule event opens or updates an alert episode, which is tracked until the condition resolves.

Reviewer 3: an alert episode is a grouping of rule events and its lifecycle is tracked and evolves based on new rule_events written

Author: Fixed in [`aeb19c8` (this PR)](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521/commits/aeb19c8e4d603ab69ca81cce21e9d86f5b6c3833).

The rule writes a signal each time it finds a match. No alert episodes are opened and no notifications go out.

:::{image} ../images/rule-detect-mode-diagram.png
:alt: Diagram of Signal mode flow. A rule runs ES|QL on a schedule. When it finds a match, it writes a signal to .rule-events. The signal is available for querying in Discover, dashboards, and ES|QL.
:::

Later, an on-call alert fires for unusual privilege escalation on the same host. During the investigation, the team queries `.rule-events` in Discover and finds that the admin API endpoint was called three times in the hour before the escalation. The Signal mode rule events did not surface the incident. The Alert mode rule did. But without the signals already in the index, the admin API activity would have been invisible during the post-incident review.

## {{alerting-v2-system-cap}} glossary [key-concepts-glossary]

These terms appear throughout the {{alerting-v2-system}} docs. If a term is unclear while reading, check its definition here before going further.

**Action policy**

> :   The gating layer between an alert episode and a workflow. You configure suppression rules, match conditions to filter which alert episodes it applies to, frequency settings to control batching and cooldown, and which workflow should send the message. Global action policies apply to alert episodes from any rule in the space. Per-rule action policies scope to a single rule.

Reviewer 3: there's no longer a distinction between global action policies and per-rule action policies. they are now merged and the policy configuration determines if they apply to a rule/ multiple rules or globally

Author: Fixed in [`aeb19c8` (this PR)](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521/commits/aeb19c8e4d603ab69ca81cce21e9d86f5b6c3833).

<!-- TODO: Uncomment when PR #6525 (workflows/notifications) is merged:
    To learn more, refer to [Notifications and actions](kibana-alerting-experimental/notifications-actions.md).
-->

**Alert episode**
:   The complete record of one problem tracked in Alert mode, from when it was first detected to when it recovered. An alert episode moves through states (pending, active, recovering, inactive) as the situation changes. This is what you see and act on on the **Alerts** page.

**Breach**

> :   A single moment when a rule's query finds a match. One breach doesn't necessarily trigger a notification. You can configure a rule to require several consecutive breaches before it confirms the problem is real.

Reviewer 3: A single moment when a rule's query finds a match. One breach doesn't necessarily trigger an alert episode.

Author: Fixed in [`aeb19c8` (this PR)](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521/commits/aeb19c8e4d603ab69ca81cce21e9d86f5b6c3833).

<!-- TODO: When PR #6525 (workflows/notifications) merges, uncomment the link below and trim this sub-section to 1–2 anchor sentences + the link.
Refer to [Notifications and actions](kibana-alerting-experimental/notifications-actions.md) to learn more.
-->

### Workflows

A workflow is what actually sends the message or runs the automation, for example, posting to Slack, sending an email, calling a webhook. The {{alerting-v2-system}} invokes workflows through action policies that you configure to trigger on a schedule or on a state change on an alert episode.

<!-- TODO: When PR #6525 (workflows/notifications) merges, uncomment the link below and trim this sub-section to 1–2 anchor sentences + the link.
Refer to [Connect workflows](kibana-alerting-experimental/workflows-alerting.md) to learn more.
-->

## How the pieces fit together [how-pieces-fit-together]

At the simplest level:

1. A rule checks your data on a schedule.
2. The rule's query returns results when data matching its conditions is found.
3. The rule's mode determines what happens next:

>    - **Alert mode** - The rule opens an alert episode to track the problem. An action policy can route it to a workflow to perform an action or send a notification.

Author: ```suggestion
   - **Alert** - The rule opens an alert episode to track the problem. An action policy can route it to a workflow to perform an action or send a notification.
```

>    - **Signal mode** - Each result is recorded for querying later. Nothing else happens.

Author: ```suggestion
   - **Signal** - Each result is recorded for querying later. Nothing else happens.
```
